
		  An analysis of the economic models
			and citation benefits
		     behind Open Access Journals

By Declan Meenagh

			     Introduction

This paper looks at the current model of for profit academic journals, and
then analysis the models behind Open Access journals.  It then looks at the
citation benefits to open access journals.

		     Current for profit Journals,

Currently, most academic journals are organised on a for profit basis.
They are owned by a company, who hires some staff to organise volunteer
editors and writers.  Usually Libraries in academic institutions pay a
subscription fee to the Journal publisher to give people in the institution
access to the journal.

In terms of citations, it is reasonable to conclude that only members of
institutions which have purchased a subscription will cite the paper.
Compared to freely available papers, the pool of potential citations is
significantly reduced.

The other issue is with discovery.  Because a lot of these are behind a pay
wall they mightn’t be fully indexed by search engines.

		       The Open Access movement

Open Journals refer to journals that allow content to be accessed free of
charge, and allow content to be used without major copyright restrictions,
usually licenced under an open source/creative commons type licence.

Because Open Access Journals are indexed by all search engines, they are
easier to find and use.  The other point is that the search engines are
more effective because they can search all the journals and different
content types as well.  Personalised search can also be helpful in giving
the researcher the paper they need.

It would seem obvious that Open Access journal articles attract more
citations, but here I look at the evidence to see what research has
uncovered.

First, in 2001, Nature published an article entitled Free online
availability substantially increases a paper's impact[1].  This report
analyses over 100,000 articles in computer science conferences.  The key
result is “The mean number of citations to offline articles is 2.74, and
the mean number of citations to online articles is 7.03, an increase of
157%.”



In the BMJ, a randomized controlled test was carried out in 11
journals published by the American Physiological Society.  1619 papers
were randomly assigned either to open access our subscription access
and their citations and downloads were tracked over a year.

The results showed a dramatic increase in downloads, but no difference
in citations over the year.

While this seems to show there is no citation benefit to open access
articles, the research was carried out in 2007, and no further
research is available.  It would be interesting to have more up to
date research done.  It would also help if multiple research was
carried out.

  Boycotting for profit journals and why it mightn’t be the answer.

Aside from being required legally to publish open research, some
academics have taken it on themselves to boycott for profit journals.

In a piece for the Guardian [3] higher education network, Martin Paul
Eve, a doctoral researcher at the University of Sussex, argues that
there is a danger in the boycott.  He argues that a researcher’s
publications are used as a rank with more prestigious for profit
journals gaining a higher rank.  If young researchers begin to boycott
these journals, their careers will suffer without any benefit.  He
argues that management need to be more aware of the issue and to
consider submissions on their merits and not just on where they are
published.


		  The economics behind Open Journals

Author contribution
Non Author contribution
Publicly funded research

			Can Open Access Work?

Open Access gets rid of print, also gets rid of subscription
management.  Open Access has no DRM, Legal or marketing costs.  Can
support some premium features.

If Library’s spent some of the journal subscription budget on
supporting Open Access Journals?

			     Legislation

Most countries have laws which require any research which is state
funded to be publicly available.  In the US, the Research Works Act
tried to outlaw Open Access but wasn’t passed.


References:

[1] Lawrence, S., Free online availability substantially increases a
paper's impact, Nature, 31 May 2001
http://www.nature.com/nature/debates/e-access/Articles/lawrence.html

[2] Open access publishing, article downloads, and citations:
randomised controlled trial
http://www.bmj.com/content/337/bmj.a568#alternate

[3] Open Access Journals, are we asking the right questions?
http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2012/feb/08/open-access-journals-elsvier-boycott
